.. _infopanel:

Info panel
==========

SPIERSview allows models to be supplemented by textual metadata, viewed
and input through the *Info panel* (see Fig. 3). This data is broken
into the following headings: *Title* (A title for the model â€“ this will
appear in the title bar of the SPIERSview window)\ *, Classification,
Authors* (intended as authors of this model)\ *, References* (either to
papers or URLs to web resources)\ *, Specimen* (Specimen numbers
etc)\ *, Provenance* (where specimen is from, including geological age
if applicable) and *Comments* (for miscellaneous notes not falling into
above categories, including copyright messages). Each of these
categories can have none, one or more textual notes contained within it,
the exception being Title which can have at most one. Classification
also differs in that items consist of two parts, a rank (e.g. Genus) and
a name (e.g. *Homo*), which are input separately.

The upper window of the the Info panel, is known as the *Info items*
window. It lists these categories, and if any contain data, these are
listed subsidiary to the category as items (you will need to expand the
category to view them). To view the data in a category simply select it:
all items will then be displayed in order in the lower *Info detail*
window of the panel.

Items can be added by double-clicking on the category heading in the
*Info items* window, deleted by selecting the item in *Info items* then
using the delete key, or edited by double-clicking on the item itself.
Attempting to delete a category will delete all items within it, but
will not remove the category heading.