.. _objectpannel:

Object Panel
============

Groups
------

Objects can be combined into groups; groups can also exist as subgroups
within other groups (see Fig. 2), enabling the user to build up a
hierarchy of objects to describe an anatomy. For instance, an arthropod
model might include a group called ‘appendages’ – this in turn might
include a subgroup called ‘cephalic’ appendages, which might in turn
include a ‘mandibles’ group, consisting of a left and right mandible.
Object grouping not only provides a convenient way to explain
relationships, but also allows visiblity to be controlled for sets of
objects – in the above example for instance a key could be assigned to
the appendages group, allowing the entire appendage set to be quickly
hidden or shown.

Groups are indicated in the panel in a standard way (Fig. 2); they can
be expanded or collapsed to show their contents. Groups only have two
properties; their shortcut key, and their visibility.

Groups are created by selecting a number of objects and using the
*Group* command (Ctrl-G) on the *Objects* menu. You should normally
rename groups after creating them. Groups are removed by selecting the
group and using the *Ungroup* command (Ctrl-G) on the *Objects* menu.
Selecting objects and using the *Ungroup* command will remove them from
the group they are currently in. You can also move an object into an
existing group with the *Move To Group* command (Ctrl-G) on the
*Objects* menu.

Turning visibility off for a group does not alter the individual
visibiity settings of contained objects (or groups), but overrides them
so they are all hidden. In Figure 2 for instance, all objects in the
‘Trunk Apps’ group are currently invisible (whatever their individual
visibility setting), as this group is set to invisible. Once visibililty
is turned on again for the parent group, the individual visibility
settings of its contained objects (or groups) are used again.

Position in object panel
------------------------

Objects (and groups) can be moved up and down the list in the objects
panel using the *Move Up* and *Move Down* commands (F12 and F11
respectively) on the *Objects* menu. These changes affect only the
panel, and have no effect on the way the model is displayed.

Object properties
-----------------

Objects listed in the object panel have seven properties detailed in
columns to the right of the name (see Fig. 2; not all columns are
visible at default panel size). The name (1:sup:`st` column), visibility
(2:sup:`nd` column), shortcut key (3:sup:`rd` column) and display colour
(4:sup:`th` column) are all modified simply by double-clicking. Note
that display colour has no effect for VAXML/PLY datasets where the
imported object has surface colour. The properties in the right hand
five columns (Fidelity, Transparency, Island Reduction, Smoothing and
Shininess) are set using commands on the object menu. Of these, only
transparency and shininess are available in *Finalised/VAXML* mode.